---
layout: post
title: Putting 2025 in Perspective - State of the Tech/LLM Industry
date: 2025-01-02 09:00:00
description: A post looking back at 2024, evaluating the state of the
  Tech/LLM industry in 2025, with a nod to historical events of note.
tags: random llm big-tech
categories: random-musings llm tech-news
featured: true
related_posts: false
---

It's 2025 now, so happy new year everyone! 🎉. This blog post arrives a few
days later than it's supposed to, because, guess what, I am a master procrastinator.
But hey, better late than never, right? 😅 This is going to be the first of
many posts that I aim to write as part of my personal blog called “Essential
Matrix”. I will primarily focus on writing about the Tech or Tech adjacent
industry, with random musings and ramblings interspersed in between.

Anyways, enough about my blog, and back to the main theme of this post -
A short look back into 2024, cool facts about the year
2025 special, and putting 2025 in perspective with respect to historical
events of note. Starting with some random facts:

- `2025` is a perfect square, as it can be expressed as $$45^2$$. For most
  people born in the late 20th or early 21st century, this will most likely
  be the only perfect square year they will witness in their lifetime.
  Unless, you are [Bryan Johnson](https://time.com/6315607/bryan-johnsons-quest-for-immortality/),
  or there is a major breakthrough in longevity research. The next perfect
  square year will be $$ 46^2 = 2116$$, which is $$91$$ years away. The
  difference between any two perfect square years is continuously increasing,
  and can be expressed as $$2n + 1$$, where $$n$$ is the perfect square
  root of the year. Here's some quick maths for it:

$$
\begin{align*}
(n+1)^2 - n^2 &= ((n+1) + n)((n+1) - n) \\
&= (2n + 1)(1) \\
&= 2n + 1 \\
&\text{Since } a^2 - b^2 = (a + b)(a - b), \text{ where } a = (n+1) \text{ and } b = n.
\end{align*}
$$

- Continuing with more maths:

$$
\begin{align*}
2025 &= (20 + 25)^2 \\
&= 1^3 + 2^3 + 3^3 + 4^3 + 5^3 + 6^3 + 7^3 + 8^3 + 9^3 \\
&= 9 + 9 + 9 + 999 + 999 \\
\end{align*}
$$

- `2025` also heralds the beginning of a new generation: [Generation
  Beta](https://www.businessinsider.com/gen-alpha-no-longer-youngest-generation-gen-beta-has-arrived-2025-1).
  Definitely, not the best name for a generation, given the negative
  connotations, but let's not digress into that.

### Things that remained the same in 2024

- For starters, One Piece is still running; Winds of Winter is still not out;
  and GTA 6 is yet to be released. George R. R. Martin is the most prolific
  procrastinator of them all 😅.
- Adding to the list of things that didn't happen:
  - Flying cars are still not a thing, and Peter Thiel's [quote](https://tnmt.com/newsletter-snippets/they-promised-us-flying-cars/)
    about "We wanted flying cars, instead we got 140 characters"
    still holds true.
  - Nuclear fusion is still only a decade away from solving all of humanity's
    energy problems. The first test for ITER is supposedly in [2039](https://www.livescience.com/physics-mathematics/worlds-largest-nuclear-reactor-is-finally-completed-but-it-wont-run-for-another-15-years).
  - Quantum computing is also still not a thing - although [Google's Willow](https://blog.google/technology/research/google-willow-quantum-chip/)
    announcement did demonstrate significant breakthroughs in the field.
- Sutton's bitter lesson still continues to hold true, and the frontier
  models continue to improve significantly. Claude Sonnet 3.5
  (New), aka Sonnet 3.6, is a major part of my daily workflow. Competition in this
  space is heating up, with new models constantly dethroning the previous
  ones in [LM Arena](https://lmarena.ai/). Personally, I am most excited by the
  Deepseek V3 [announcement](https://techcrunch.com/2024/12/26/deepseeks-new-ai-model-appears-to-be-one-of-the-best-open-challengers-yet/?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAAA7gdeeXoLhVq6eKujg65469N-Ep5I6Ul85jxeQneLRvQYJ30ivnje6AA0spHhCkSrfWmL3vn1iTwk-_If0xRPQyDL0lSMxB2cfbRhm8VPaSERmB1EB8qvF600GeXyRCyuAU27bxTmX-oY8IqsVbpcSxYfEZe09bacS8S3slhvnc), and can't wait to try their 671 Billion
  parameter model out.

<div class="row justify-content-center">
<div class="col-10">
    {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/post1/gpus_go_brrr.webp"
class="img-fluid
rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
</div>
</div>

- LLM providers working on frontier models continue to be really bad at
  [naming](https://x.com/nearcyan/status/1866939351592210573) their models.
  The names of the models just don't make any sense: It just makes more
  sense to rename "Claude Sonnet 3.5 (New)" to "Claude Sonnet 3.6" and
  "Gemini 2.0 Flash Thinking" to something simpler like "Gemini Reasoning 1.
  0". OpenAI's "o1" and "o3" naming conventions are confusing as well - is
  "GPT 4o" supposed to be the "better" model or "GPT o1". Someone not in
  tune with the latest developments in the field would be completely lost.

<div class="row justify-content-center">
    <div class="col-4">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/post1/openai.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-4">
        <div class="row mb-3">
            {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/post1/google.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
        </div>
        <div class="row mb-3">
            {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/post1/anthropic.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
        </div>
    </div>
</div>

### Things that I didn't expect in 2024

- Apple finally announced [support](https://www.theverge.com/2024/11/7/24290703/apple-green-bubble-message-reaction-rcs-android)
  for RCS, and enabled it from iOS 18.1 onwards.
- Continuing on the Apple theme, they also finally released an iPhone with a
  USB-C port, and upgraded the base [memory](https://9to5mac.com/2024/11/01/macbook-air-ram-upgrade-announcement/)
  in their Mac lineup to 16GB.
- Python `3.13` was finally [released](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3130/),
  and it makes the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) optional.
  - For anyone unaware about the story of GIL and Python, it's simply a mutex
    that protects access to Python objects, and allows only one thread to
    hold the control of the Python interpreter. This makes scaling true
    multi-threaded Python applications is hard.
  - This [PEP](https://peps.python.org/pep-0703/) describes the issue in detail,
    and honestly, does a way better job explaining it than I ever could.
- The scaling laws for LLMs don't seem to be holding as well as expected,
  and a lot of research focus is towards scaling test time compute for
  models like OpenAI's o1, o3, and Deepmind's Gemini 2.0 Flash Thinking.

### What the future beholds

<div style="border: 1px solid #ccc; padding: 10px; margin: 10px 0; background-color: #f0f8ff; font-family: Libre Baskerville, serif; font-style: italic; font-size: 1.1em;">
    The release of the first iPhone on June 29, 2007 is equally close
    chronologically to the fall of the Berlin Wall on November 9, 1989, than it is
    to today's date.
</div>

The world changes quickly, and it seems like the pace of change is only
increasing with time. To put things into perspective, in 1989, the Internet
as we know today was not a thing, there were no smartphones, and most of the
biggest tech companies of today like Google, Amazon, Facebook, and Netflix,
were not even founded. Software had not yet eaten the world, and this was
clearly visible when looking at a plot of the top 5 companies by market cap in 1989:

<div class="l-page">
  <iframe src="{{ '/assets/d3/market_cap_1989.html' | relative_url }}"
    width="100%"
    height="500px"
    style="border: 1px dashed grey; overflow: hidden;"
  >
  </iframe>
</div>

There's only one American company in the top 5, and the rest all were
Japanese. The dominant industries were Banking, Energy, and Automobiles, and
the Tech industry was still in its nascent stages. The only American tech
company in the top 10 was IBM. Industrial Bank of Japan was the most valuable
with a market cap of $104.3 Billion dollars, but that dwarfs in comparison to
Apple's [gross income](https://www.wsj.com/market-data/quotes/AAPL/financials/annual/income-statement)
of roughly $180 Billion in 2024. The dramatic shift in the markets is best
understood by looking at the same plot as of 2024:

<div class="l-page">
  <iframe src="{{ '/assets/d3/market_cap_2024.html' | relative_url }}"
    width="100%"
    height="500px"
    style="border: 1px dashed grey; overflow: hidden;"
  >
  </iframe>
</div>

In 2025, the top 5 companies by market cap are all tech companies, and three
out of the top five were founded after 1989. All the top five companies
are American, and only one Japanese company still remains in the top 50 -
Toyota. Tech industry is absolutely dominant, and the dominance of the
American Big Tech companies is staggering - only four companies in the top
20 are not American - Saudi Aramco, TSMC, Eli Lilly, and Tencent. A lot of
this dominance of American big tech companies can be attributed to the zero
marginal cost of software, and the network and aggregation effects that
accumulate over time. However, this zero marginal cost of software might not
continue to hold in the future, especially with the rise of LLMs and new
reasoning models like o1, o3, and Gemini 2.0 Flash Thinking that use compute
during test/inference time as well. If we are to believe Sam Altman, the
ChatGPT Pro subscription which costs $200 per month, is still continuing to
[lose money](https://techcrunch.com/2025/01/05/openai-is-losing-money-on-its-pricey-chatgpt-pro-plan-ceo-sam-altman-says/)
for OpenAI.

#### How it all ties back to the present and the near future

The reason I bring up the launch of the iPhone as a reference point is that
it would have been possible for someone in 2007 to predict the dominance of
the tech giants in 2025, even if no one could have predicted the exact set
of companies that would dominate. In fact, an astute observer might have
predicted that companies like Google, Amazon, Facebook, and Apple would be
the top companies by market cap in 2025, and they would have been right mostly.

The public release of the first transformer model in 2017 via the "Attention
is all you need" paper, is most likely a similar seminal moment in the tech
industry. 2017 was only eight years ago, but we can already see the ripple
effects of the transformer model in the tech industry. Nvidia's market cap
in 2015 was roughly $17 Billion, and it was not even in the
[top 100](https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/audit-services/capital-market/publications/assets/document/pwc-global-top-100-march-update.pdf)
companies by market cap. Now, in 2025, Nvidia is the second/third most
valuable company in the world, depending on the day. A good question to ask
is whether someone in 2025 can make reasonable predictions about the top
companies by market cap in 2033, exactly eight years from now. For
posterity's sake, here are my predictions:

1. `Nvidia` - no surprises here, Nvidia's GPUs are fundamental to all parts of
   the LLM ecosystem, and it's hard to see them lose ground in the
   training/inference compute market given their CUDA ecosystem and moat.
2. `Google` - another no-brainer, given Google's dominance in the search
   market, their incredible AI research team, access to vast amounts of
   compute and specialized hardware like TPUs, and access to sources of data
   that no other company has, like YouTube videos, Search history, and
   Maps/Navigational data. A lot of benefits of foundation models will also
   accrue to the aggregators and Google would be the biggest beneficiary
   given their ownership of Google Search, Android, Chrome, and YouTube.
3. `Apple` - while Apple is not in the forefront of the AI/LLM space, they
   will still be one of the biggest beneficiaries of the rise of LLMs simply
   due to their ownership of the App Store, and iOS ecosystem. Any time
   someone subscribes to a ChatGPT Pro, or Google's new Gemini models, Apple
   gets a cut of the subscription revenue. Additionally, Apple can always
   use the frontier models from OpenAI, Google to distill
   knowledge and train their own smaller models for on-device inference, and
   off-load any heavy lifting to these LLM providers. Thus, Apple's current
   AI strategy seems to make a lot of sense financially speaking, with the
   big risk being that LLMs may fundamentally change the way
   software is written and consumed, leaving Apple behind, just like
   Blackberry was left behind when the iPhone was launched.
4. `Microsoft`/`OpenAI` - again, not much needs to be said here. OpenAI has
   continuously been at the forefront of pushing frontier models, and
   Microsoft just like Google, Meta, and Apple, will be a big beneficiary of
   the rise of LLMs due to their position as an aggregator. Microsoft is
   fully committed to investing in this space, and aims to invest over $80
   Billion dollars on building data centers. This number is mind-boggling,
   but makes sense if you consider that Microsoft does not want to miss on
   the next computing paradigm shift, given their abysmal record in the
   mobile domain.
5. `Meta` - they have a great research team, and also have access to vast
   amounts of data from Facebook, Instagram, and WhatsApp, which is simply
   not available to any other company. Additionally, as an aggregator, they
   benefit from the network effects of the platform, and the dominance of
   Generative AI models for image and video generation would be hugely
   beneficial for their advertising business.

Other than these five companies, the other notable runners-up would be
`Amazon` (AWS duh), `SpaceX` (if they go public), `Eli Lilly` (Mounjaro and
other GLP-1 inhibitors are doing really well). The interesting thing to note
about my predictions, which can obviously be wrong, is that it assumes that
no new competitors will emerge in the next eight years. There are two main
reasons for my predictions:

- While the zero marginal cost of software allowed several companies to
  emerge and dominate the tech industry, and leapfrog the incumbents, the LLM/AI
  paradigm shift is fundamentally different. As Doug O'Laughlin put recently in his
  [blog post](https://www.fabricatedknowledge.com/p/2025-ai-and-semiconductor-outlook)
  marginal costs are coming for tech companies, and the death of ZIRP (Zero
  Interest Rate Phenomenon) means that the incumbents are the most well-equipped
  to handle the rising costs of compute.
- Additionally, the emergence of newer models like Deepseek V3, seems to
  indicate that frontier LLMs might soon be a commodity, and the real value
  would be in the data and the underlying network effects of the platform. This is
  where the aggregators like Google, Meta, Apple, and Microsoft have the
  biggest moat, and it's hard to see any new entrant breaking into these
  respective moats/de-facto monopolies.

One major source of risk that these predictions do not account for is all
sorts of regulatory risks that these companies face, especially in the antitrust
domain. However, barring any major regulatory changes, or AT&T style
breakups, this should not have a major impact on the dominance of these
companies.

### Zooming out

While making predictions about the future is fun, it's important to zoom out
and realize that the future is inherently unpredictable.
[Roy Amara](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roy_Amara), famously stated the
following quote, also known as Amara's Law:

{%quote%}
We tend to overestimate the effect of a technology in the short run and
underestimate the effect in the long run.
{%endquote%}

In essence, even if the progress in the next eight years is not as
revolutionary as the last eight years (which is highly unlikely), the cumulative
effect of the progress in various domains will continue to compound, and the
future will be vastly different from what we can imagine today. For instance,
the year 2025 is closer to the year 2100 than it is to the year 1950. The
illustration below shows some of the major technological breakthroughs that
happen in the last 75 years, primarily in the bits and atoms domain.

<div class="row justify-content-center">
    {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/post1/visualization_75_years1.png"
class="img-fluid
rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
</div>

Specifically, humanity mastered quantum mechanics, resulting in the
development of the Tsar Bomba, the most powerful nuclear weapon ever detonated.
Humans also designed the first transistor, landed on the moon, and
developed the internet in this time frame. And finally, the other big
breakthrough was the launch of the iPhone, which fundamentally changed the
way most people interact with technology. The next 75 years are likely to
have just as many, if not more, breakthroughs: mastering fusion, figuring
out quantum computing, colonizing Mars, developing AGI, and maybe even curing
cancer and aging.

That's all for this post - see you in the next one! 🚀
